---
title: Cppcon - Back to Basics (Part 1)
date: 2020-10-17 23:00:00
slug: cppcon-back-to-basics-1
---

Recently I watched several videos from Cppcon 2020 back to basics series, it helps refresh some of my knowledge in C++, documenting it here. I've only finished 4 videos so far. Will keep updating this post when I finished more.

<!--more-->


## Smart Pointers

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sQCSX7vmmKY&t=3572s)

A fun talk going over everything related to smart pointers.

One interesting takeaway from the talk is ownership semantics for function parameters.

- `func(value)`, an independent owner for the resource, deletes `value` at the end of `func`.
- `func(pointer*)`, borrows the resource, the resource could be empty. Must not delete the resource.
- `func(reference&)`, borrows the resource, the resource could not be empty. Must not delete the resource.
- `func(std::unique_ptr)`, is an independent owner of the resource. Deletes the resource at the end of `func`.
- `func(shared_ptr)`, is a shared owner of the resource, may delete the resource at the end of `func`.
- `func(std::unique_ptr<int>)`, `func` takes ownership.
- `func(std::unique_ptr<int>&)`, `func` might reseat `int`.
- `func(std::shared_ptr<int>)`, `func` shares ownership.
- `func(std::shared_ptr<int>&)`, `func` might reseat `int`.
- `func(const std::shared_ptr<int>&)`, `func` might retain a reference counter.

Some other notes:
- Use `make_unique`, `make_shared` for creating smart pointers. They are faster.
- Unique pointers don't incur a lot more overhead.
- Use smart pointers but don't share. If you want to share, use atomic shared pointers (C++11 `std::shared_ptr`, C++20 
`std::atomic_shared_ptr`)


## Concurrency

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F6Ipn7gCOsY)

### Concurrency vs. Parallelism

- Concurrency means doing two things concurrently, maybe you are switching back and forth, like cooking eggs and boiling water. [asyncio](https://blog.wwei10.com/posts/understanding-asyncio/) is a great example of concurrency. 
- Parallelism means doing two things in parallel, simultaneously. Like running and listening to music. Map/Reduce is an example where multiple mappers and reducers do things at the same time.


### std::thread

Beginning in C++11, the standard library has built-in implementation of threads (`std::thread`). It also adds 
`std::mutex`, `std::atomic<T>` to support synchronization between threads.

A simple example that shows how to create a new thread:
```cpp
int main() {
  int result = 0;
  std::thread threadB = std::thread([&](){  // Capture by reference
    puts("hello from threadB!");
    result = 10;  // This demonstrates how to set results in main thread.
  });  // New thread starts executing immediately.
  threadB.join();  // Calling .join will block if necessary, until the other thread's job is finished.
  puts("hello from threadA!");
  std::cout << result << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

Result from the program is:
```
hello from threadA!
hello from threadB!
10
```

Note that threadA prints first because `threadB.join` is before threadA's `puts` statement.


### std::atomic<T>

```cpp
int main() {
  using SC = std::chrono::steady_clock;
  auto deadline = SC::now() + std::chrono::seconds(10);
  int counter = 0;
  std::atomic<int> atomicCounter{0};
  std::thread threadB = std::thread([&]() {
    while (SC::now() < deadline) {
      std::cout << "B: " << ++counter << " " << ++atomicCounter << std::endl;
    }
  });
  while (SC::now() < deadline) {
    std::cout << "A: " << ++counter << " " << ++atomicCounter << std::endl;
  }
  threadB.join();
  // Prints "2734939 2734966", atomic fixes data race issue.
  std::cout << counter << " " << atomicCounter << std::endl;
  return 0;
}
```

### Mutex and Thread-safe Singleton

- Since C++11, mutex, condition_variable have been added. Some additional notes for using them safely:
- Lock is a resource, follow RAII for exception safety. `lock_guard`, `unique_lock` are your friends. Prefer `lock_guard` if you don't need to pass it around.
- Thread safe static initialization is your friend. (Construct On First Use Idiom)
- Use `std::once_flag` only when the initialization is non-static.


```cpp
class NetworkConnection {
 public:
  NetworkConnection() { std::cout << "Constructor" << std::endl; }
};

class Logger {
  std::once_flag once_;
  std::unique_ptr<NetworkConnection> conn_;

 public:
  NetworkConnection* getConn() {
    std::call_once(once_,
                   [&]() { conn_ = std::make_unique<NetworkConnection>(); });
    return conn_.get();
  }
};

inline auto& getInstance() {
  static Logger instance;
  return instance;
}

int main() {
  std::mutex mtx;
  std::thread threadB = std::thread([&]() {
    std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lk(mtx);
    getInstance().getConn();
    std::cout << "thread B" << std::endl;
  });
  {
    std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lk(mtx);
    std::cout << "thread A" << std::endl;
    getInstance().getConn();
  }
  threadB.join();
  return 0;
}
```

With C++20, `std::counting_semaphore`, `std::latch`, `std::barrier` are added but I won't go into details here.

## Design Patterns

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2UUqX2eIdSM)

- Creational: provides program more flexibility on how to create objects, often avoiding direct instantiation of a specific object.
- Structural: focuses on using inheritance to compose interfaces and define objects in a way to create new functionality.
- Behavioral: focuses on how to communicate between objects.

### Creational Pattern

Example: Singleton.

```cpp
class Config {
  int x_;
  Config() {}  // Private constructor so no way to create Config outside getInstance function.
  ~Config() {}  // Private deconstructor.
public:
  int getX();
  void setX(int x);
  static Config& getInstance() {
    static Config instance;  // Static variable. Guaranteed to be initialized exactly once.
    return instance;
  }
};
```

Singleton is also suitable for logger and it is super easy to add data into logger from everywhere in the code without the need to pass logger instance around.

Downsides:
- If sometimes we actually need two instances, it takes time to refactor.
- Not thread-safe.
- Essentially still a global variable.

### Structural Pattern

Example: Adapter - converts the interface of a class into another interface the client expects.

```cpp
class AdapterX {
 X x_;  // holds a copy of X. Goal is change X's interface to your designed interface.
 public:
  AdapterX();
  // Other interfaces you expect.
};
```

Adapter is just like a wrapper. This is quite common during migration: you still want to leverage some functionalities of the legacy class, so you create a wrapper on top of it and slowly moves away from the legacy class.

### Behavior Pattern

Example: Iterator - provides sequential access to elements in a collection without exposing the representation.

C++ STL supports iterator really well, `vector`, `set`, `map` all support `.begin()`, `.end()`, and `++` operation. Range based for loop for STL is implemented based on iterator pattern.

```cpp
// Example usage of iterator.
for (auto it = map.begin(); it != map.end(); it++) {
    std::cout << "key: " << it->first << " value: " << it->second << std::endl;
}
// Range-for loop syntax, underneath, it is still based on begin, end, and ++.
for (const auto& [k, v] : map) {
    std::cout << "key: " << k << " value: " << v << std::endl;
}
```

If there is no operator overloading support, `next`, `hasNext` interface is a quite common iterator design.


## Exceptions

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ojB8c0xUd8)

### Overhead

Exceptions incur an extreme performance overhead in the failure case because a lot of work is needed to do stack unwinding when exception is thrown.  What is stack unwinding? Objects on the stack are destroyed in reverse order. If exception is not caught, `std::terminate` will be called, no stack unwinding happens in such case.

Given the overhead, when to use exceptions?
- For errors that are expected to occur rarely.
- For exceptional cases that cannot be dealt with locally (I/O errors like file not found)
- For operators, constructors (you can't use other mechanisms, like you can't return error code for such cases)

When not to use exceptions?
- Frequently failing functions. Example: make `auto to_int(const std::string& s)` return `std::optional<int>`.
- For things that should never happen. Deferencing `nullptr`, out of range access, use after free.
- Catch by reference. `catch (const std::exception& ex)`.

### Best Practices

1/ Build on the `std::exception` hierarchy.
2/ Throw by rvalue. `throw std::runtime_error("Error message")`.

### The Exception Safety Guarantees

There are 3 types of exception safety guarantees.

- Basic exception safety guarantee
  - Invariants are preserved.
  - No resources are leaked.
- Strong exception safety guarantee
  - Invariatns are preserved.
  - No resources are leaked.
  - No state chagne (commit-or-rollback)
- No-throw gurantee
  - The operation cannot fail.
  - Expressed in code with `noexcept`.


### How to Write Exception-Safe Code

- Follow **RAII** (resource acquisition in initiailzation) principle.
  - Don't use raw pointer type. Use smart pointers.
- **Temporary-move** idiom. (All or nothing)

Example:

```cpp
class Widget {
 public:
  // Copy assignment operator
  Widget& operator=(const Widget& w) {
    if (this == &w) return *this;
    // RAII-based approach
    Widget tmp(w);  // Temporary-move idiom.
    *this = move(tmp);
    return *this;
  }

  // Move assignment operator
  Widget& operator=(Widget&& w) noexcept;
};
```