---
title: Cppcon - Back to Basics (Part 2)
date: 2020-10-25 23:00:00
slug: cppcon-back-to-basics-2
---

This is the part 2 of cppcon back to basics series. We will continue with algebraic data types, lambda expressions and a few other topics.

<!--more-->


## Lambda Expressions

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZIPNFcw6V9o)

```cpp
class Ginger {
  void operator()(std::string str);
};

Ginger widget;
widget.operator()("hello");
widget("hello");
```

- Function object data type
  - Class which declares the `operator()()` method.
- Function object
  - Class or struct which declares the operator() method.

```cpp
int x = 20;
auto lambda = [x]() {
  std::cout << "hello, " << x << std::endl;
};
x = 10;
lambda();  // Prints 20 as x is captured by value. Will print 10 if capture x by reference i.e. &x
```

- Lambda expression
  - Evaluated at run time and produces a **function object**.
  - Can be assigned to a named variable which stores the closure.
- Key parts of a lambda expression:
  - Capture clause, parameter list, body.
  - Lifetime matters when capturing by reference.
- Data type of the closure should be auto.

```cpp
std::unique_ptr<Widget> myPtr = std::make_unique<Widget>();
auto lamdba = [capturedPtr = std::move(myPtr)]() {
  return capturedPtr->compute();
};
```
- Generalized capture - capture by move.


```cpp
auto lambda = [](double data) {
  return int(data);
};
doThingA(lambda);
doThingB(lambda);

template<typename T>
void doThingA(T arg1);

void doThingB(std::function<int (double)> arg2);
```
- Two ways to pass lambda around.

- Generic lambda - parameter list data type of `auto` or `T`

## Algebraic Data Types

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJzmWqCCZaM)


This talk mainly covers 4 types:
- `pair`
- `tuple`
- `optional`
- `variant`

`pair` and `tuple` are called product types. `optional`, `variant` are called sum types.

Why do we say "algebraic"? What are product types and sum types.
- Say `A` has `x` possible values, `B` has `y` possible values, `C` has `z` possible values.
- Product types.
  - `pair<A, B>` has `xy` possible values.
  - `tuple<A, B, C>` has `xyz` possible values.
- Sum types.
  - `optional<A>` has `x+1` possible values.
  - `variant<A, B>` has `x+y` possible values.

### When to Use These Types?

- `pair`: when you want to return two values from a function.
- `tuple`: when you want to return more than two values from a function.
- `optional`: when you sometimes want to return empty value for your function. Like `std::optional<int> to_int(std::string s);`. You can use `optional` to replace usage of smart pointers sometime when you want to allocate resource on stack instead of heap.
- `variant`: this is quite similar to `union` concept in c but better as this supports runtime check ensuring code doesn't have undefined behaviors.


### Common Features of Algebraic Types

1/ `Engaged` and `disengaged`
- An `optional` which holds a value is said to be `engaged`.
- An empty `optional` is said to be `disengaged`.

```cpp
std::optional<int> i;
if (i.has_value()) {
  // Do something.
}
// This also works as it supports implicit conversion to bool.
if (i) {
  // Do something.
}
```

2/ "Emplace" and in-place construction..

`variant`, `optional` allocate resources in advance and can be considered as a `buffer` that may or may not hold a certain type. We can explicitly `emplace` an object into that buffer. The old value will be destroyed before new value is constructed. Arguments are perfectly forwarded to `T`'s constructor.

```cpp
optional<int> i;
i.emplace(10);
optional<std::string> s;
s.emplace("abc");
// Recommended
std::cout << s.value_or("empty") << std::endl;
if (s.has_value()) {
  std::cout << s.value() << std::endl;
}
// Not recommened.
if (s) {
  std::cout << *s << std::endl;
}
```

3/ `std::get`


`std::get` conduct runtime checks and may throw exceptions to remain type-safe.

```cpp
std::pair<int, int> p = {10, 20};
std::cout << std::get<0>(p) << std::endl;  // Print p.first.
std::get<1>(p) = 40;  // Update p.second.
```

4/ Making `pairs` and `tuples` by `std::make_pair` and `std::make_tuple`.

5/ `std::tie`

```cpp
std::pair<int, bool> p{10, true};
int i;
bool flag;
std::tie(i, flag) = p;
```

### More

I left out `std::in_place`, `std::piecewise_construct`, `std::visit`, `std::variant::valueless_by_exception` for now as I haven't seen them in real-world applications so far.

## Move Semantics

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZG59Bqo7qX4&list=PLHTh1InhhwT6VxYHtoWIvOup9gz0p95Qr&index=68)

C++11 introduced `move semantics`. Move constructor and move assignment operator:
- Transfer ownership, a.k.a. move from, rather than copy.
- Used when the source object is an rvalue.
  - `lvalue`: **anything that can appear on the left side of assignment, with a name, with an address**.
  - Use `std::move` to do typecast.
- Can result in more efficient code.

### RValue References

```cpp
void func(foo&& arg);  // arg is a rvalue reference

void f(int&&);
void g(int&& x) {
    f(x);  // Error! The use of an rvalue reference is an lvalue.
}
```

- An rvalue reference can only bind to an rvalue.
- The use of an rvalue reference is an lvalue.

Guidelines:
- No rvalue reference to const type.
  - Use a non-const rvalue reference instead.
  - Most uses of rvalue references modify the object being referenced. Const prevents it from happening.
  - Most rvalues are not const.
- No rvalue reference as function return type.
  - Return by value instead.


### std::move

`std::move` is simply a type cast. It doesn't actually move anything.

Guidelines:
- Next operation after std::move is destruction or assignment. (or reset to a known value by other means, such as `vector<T>::clear()`)
- Don't `std::move` the return of a local variable.

### Move Constructor / Assignment Operator

```cpp
struct S {
  int a;
  double* data;
  // Move constructor
  S(S&& other) noexcept : a(std::move(other.a)),
                          data(std::exchange(other.data, nullptr));
  // Move assignment
  S& operator=(S&&) noexcept;
};
```

Move constructor:
1. Use each field's move constructor if possible.
2. `std::exchange` is convinient to use when writing move constructor.

Move assignment:
1. Free resources owned by assigned-to object.
2. Transfer ownership of resources.
  - Use each field's move assignment operator when possible.

Guidelines:
1. Move constructor / assignment should be explicitly noexcept.
2. Moved-from object must be left in a valid state.
3. Use =default when possible.
4. **Make move assignment safe for self-assignment.** (easy to miss)
5. Rule of 5 / rule of 0. If default behavior is correct for (1) destructor, (2) copy constructor, (3) copy assignment operator, (4) move constructor, (5) move assignment operator, use default. Otherwise define all of them explicitly.

## Class Layouts

[Youtube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SShSV_iV1Ko)

### Non Static Data Member Layout

- In modern C++, members with the same access had to be laid out in the same relative order.
- The order in which the base class subobjects are allocated in the most derived object is unspecified.
- Empty class members occupy space until C++20. (Read `no_unique_address`, empty base class optimization for more details)
- Lexical ordering is guaranteed by the standard but not physical ordering. (Operator `<=>` compares non static data members in lexical order)
- C++ provides layout guarantees only for standard-layout types. Standard layout type is essentially a C type. (`POD` type)
  - The first non-static data member is at offset zero.
  - Each subsequent non-static data member has an offset greater than the offset of the non-static data member declared before it.
  - The storage for objects of the class are in contiguous memory.
- Use static assertions to verify layout. `static_assert(offsetof(UART, UCON) == 4, "UCON member must be at offset 4 within UART");`


```cpp
class NarrowLand {
  char x;  // offset 0
  unsigned long long y;  // offset 8
  unsigned long long z;  // offset 16
  friend bool operator ==(const NarrowLand& lhs, const NarrowLand &rhs);
};
// A fun example of optimizing == using memcmp, however, due to padding, result from this may be wrong.
// You can't assume padding is zero initialized.
bool operator ==(const NarrowLand& lhs, const NarrowLand& rhs) {
    return !memcmp(&lhs, &rhs, sizeof(NarrowLand));
}
```

### Virtual Functions

```cpp
class B {
 public:
  virtual int f1();
};
B* bp = new B();
bp->f1();
// translates to something like:
(*(bp->vptr)[0])(bp)
```

- If a class has a virtual function, every object of that type contains a pointer to a shared virtual function table.
  - `vtable` is a dumping ground for most type-related information about a class.
- A derived class has its own virtual table. Overriding derived class functions replace those of the base class.
- Multiple inheritance:
  - An object can have more than one valid address.
- Avoid virtual inheritance.