---
title: Boost Your Productivity - Alfredapp
date: 2020-10-16
slug: alfredapp
---

In this post, I want to share one of my most favorite productivity tool - Alfred. I will keep this post updated if I find out more functions I enjoy.

<!--more-->

Some top features I enjoy:

1. Clipboard history.
2. Snippet expansion.
3. Advanced workflow.

## Clipboard History

[Clipboard history](https://www.alfredapp.com/help/features/clipboard/) supports both text, images and alfred supports searching too. I consider clipboard history a nice `cache` where I can quickly retrieve frequently copy / pasted things in the past days.

## Snippet and Text Expansion

For things frequently copy and paste beyond several days, I would store inside [snippets](https://www.alfredapp.com/help/features/snippets/) with some shortcuts.

Categories of things I found most useful with this feature:

1. Personal information like emails (shortcut: `;em`), home addresses (shortcut: `;home`), phone numbers (`;phone`), etc
2. Emojis `;check` = ✅, `;danger` = ☢️, `;warn` = ⚠️.
3. Frequently used commands `;hgd` = `hg diff -r .^`, `;hgr` = `hg revert {cursor} -r .~1`, `;hgs` = `hg status --no-status --rev .^` to save typing and look up time. You can consider this as what you would put into your `.zshrc` but it applies to more than just your terminals.
4. Dates: I often find myself needed to input dates in different formats, storing it as snippets saves me typing and looking up dates and day of week. Example: `;date` = `10/16/2020`, `;time` = `10/16/2020, 11:34 AM`.

Note: Alfred doesn't have feature parity with textexpander. If you need fill-in-blank snippets to create custom templates with multiple inputs, textexpander might suit your need better. I enjoyed textexpander but decided to give it up because alfred can already do a good enough job for my workload.

## More Advanced Workflow

Sometimes, I have repeated work that can be automated by some scripts. For workloads like this, I will turn to workflow support in alfred.

It is easy to use shell, python, golang or language of your choice to implement a workflow in Alfred. I will just share two workflows I built for my own needs.

### Timestamp Tool

I usually need to look up unixtime, week number, get a date to use in database query (yyyy-mm-dd), etc. It takes time to query google every time. So I decided to build a simple time conversion tool. An example recording:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/dtJdLe1C9TU" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

To get a sql time range, I can simply `option + space` to start alfred launcher and then type `ts +1d`, then do `command + 3` to get tomorrow's date in SQL format into my clipboard and I can `command + v` to the place I need it.

### Timer Workflow

I need a timer that is easy to start, able to send a desktop notification when it is done, as well as block non-work related websites in safari for the specified time. I don't want to use any 3rd party website blockers so I decided to build my own. Example is shown below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QnPj30huhfE" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

I used URL scheme to communicate between alfred script I created and the website blocker I created, and it requires me to click "Allow" in safari, let me know if you have a better way to communicate via URL scheme without the extra click.

## Conclusion

Alfred is more powerful than this, let me know how you customize it to suit your needs!